Modify Getting-Started page (#6830)
prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator: Documentation/user-guides/getting-started.md

description: Getting started guide
---

The Prometheus Operator introduces custom resources in Kubernetes to declare
the desired state of a Prometheus and Alertmanager cluster as well as the
Prometheus configuration.

> This guide walks you through setting up a `Prometheus` instance and configuring it to collect metrics from a sample application using `PodMonitor` and `ServiceMonitor` custom resources.

Reviewer: Actually I think we need to think a bit more here. This page is not talking about ServiceMonitor and it talks about stuff that doesn't make sense in the developer guide. (Exposing Admin API)

description: Getting started guide
---

This guide explains how to use `PodMonitor` and `ServiceMonitor` objects to monitor targets for a sample application.

The `Prometheus` resource declaratively describes the desired state of a
Prometheus deployment, while `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` resources
describe the targets to be monitored by Prometheus.

## Pre-requisites

Before you begin, ensure that you have:

> * A Kubernetes cluster with [admin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/) permissions

Reviewer 2: (nit) "admin" is a bit vague. IIUC we mean "all permissions on the target namespace where resources are deployed". To be more explicit, we should probably say in which namespace resources are deployed so we don't require full cluster admin permissions and people can adjust to their needs. But it's only comments for a follow-up: for this PR, the current wording is fine.

* A running Prometheus Operator (refer to the [Installation]({{<ref "installation.md">}}) page)

> * A running Prometheus instance (refer to the [Platform Guide]({{<ref "getting-started.md">}}))

Reviewer 2: hmm isn't it a reference to self?

Author: The getting-started pages in the platform and developer guide have the same name so it probably couldn't recognize it. I will change the name of the platform page.

<!-- do not change this link without verifying that the image will display correctly on https://prometheus-operator.dev -->

![Prometheus Operator Architecture](../img/service-and-podMonitor.svg)

## Deploying a sample application

> First, let's deploy a simple example application with 3 replicas that listens

Reviewer 2: same here, we should be explicit about the target namespace.

description: Getting started guide
---

The Prometheus Operator introduces custom resources in Kubernetes to declare

> the desired state of a Prometheus and Alertmanager cluster as well as the

Reviewer 2: not sure why we talk about Alertmanager here since the guide seems focused on Prometheus + monitor resources. Maybe add a note that the operator can also manage other custom resources but not mention them?

Author: > Should we move this to the top? I like that a getting started guide states what it covers upfront.

If we move the statement that we will cover ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor in this guide to the top, there is no need to discuss this point. The next line again talks about Service and PodMonitor so this feels like it's not needed in between the two points. Wdyt?

Prometheus configuration.

The `Prometheus` resource declaratively describes the desired state of a
Prometheus deployment, while `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` resources
describe the targets to be monitored by Prometheus.

> This guide explains how to use `PodMonitor` and `ServiceMonitor` objects to monitor targets for a sample application.

Reviewer 2: Should we move this to the top? I like that a getting started guide states what it covers upfront.

## Pre-requisites

You will need a Kubernetes cluster with admin permissions to follow this guide.

> To install Prometheus Operator, please refer to the instructions [here]({{<ref "installation.md">}}).

Reviewer 2: Can we list all the pre-requisites?

````
To follow this guide you need
* A Kubernetes cluster with admin permissions.
* A running Prometheus Operator (refer to ...).

> Also, refer to the Platform Guide to learn how to deploy a Prometheus instance before moving ahead.

Author: After we create a page on deploying the Prometheus instance, and other related things like admin API, how to access UI, etc, I will add a link here.

Reviewer: Hmmm, I wonder if we should block this PR until we have the getting started page for the platform guide 🤔

Reviewer: Should we add a link now?

<!-- do not change this link without verifying that the image will display correctly on https://prometheus-operator.dev -->

![Prometheus Operator Architecture](../img/serviceMonitor-and-podMonitor.png)

> > Note: Check the [Alerting guide]({{< ref "alerting" >}}) for more information about the `Alertmanager` resource.

Reviewer: What do you of this line here, does it make sense?

Reviewer: The line I mention is the note for the alerting guide

Author: I think we can remove it. I don't see any point in mentioning it here. Nice catch :+1:

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a note in the introduction (e.g. "To configure alerting, check ...")?

> > Note: Check the [Design page]({{< ref "design" >}}) for an overview of all resources introduced by the Prometheus Operator.

Reviewer 2: (suggestion) have a "What's next" section at the end of the doc (like in the [Kubernetes docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/#what-s-next))?

Reviewer 2: No, I'm more thinking about linking to related pages (e.g. "now that you've completed X, maybe you want to carry on with Y and Z").

Reviewer: I feel like the pages should be ordered in a way that people can just click "next" and it makes sense 🤔. What do you think about moving pages around?

Reviewer 2: It's not sufficient IMHO since you may want to suggest multiple pages. See the link I've shared above for the Kubernetes doc.

Author: I like the idea of the "what's next" section but then it will eliminate the need for the "Next" button. This is a non-linear approach and we would need to be very careful with all the cross-references and pre-requisites on each page.

A Guide is a step-by-step method to teach users how to accomplish a task. With this, we cannot ensure what direction a user should follow to completely understand the guide.

Reviewer 2: Ack, I agree that it needs a wider discussion. At the same time (and to keep this guide straight to the point), I would adivse to remove links to the Alerting and Design pages here (e.g. it breaks the flow).

          containerPort: 8080
```

> To monitor the application using a `ServiceMonitor`, target discovery is required. We will begin by creating a `Service` object for this purpose.
> 
> ## Using ServiceMonitors
> 
> Let's expose the application with a Service object that selects all the Pods with the label `app` set to `example-app` and specify the port where the metrics are exposed.

Reviewer 2: (suggestion) 
```suggestion
## Using ServiceMonitors

To monitor the application using a `ServiceMonitor`, we will begin by exposing the application with a Service object that selects all the Pods with the label `app` set to `example-app` and specify the port where the metrics are exposed.
```

          containerPort: 8080
```

> Let's expose the application with a Service object that selects all the Pods

Reviewer 2: this paragraph should be moved to the ServiceMonitor section?

Author: What about moving the "Using ServiceMonitors" section above PodMonitor? Then we can explain the need for the Service object in this para and move on to that section.

Reviewer 2: works for me.

with the `app` label having the `example-app` value. The Service object also
specifies the port on which the metrics are exposed.

## Using PodMonitors

> We can utilize a `PodMonitor` object to monitor the pods. The `spec.selector` label specifies which Pods Prometheus should scrape.

Reviewer 2: "monitor the pods" seems vague to me, should we say "scrape metrics from the pods" instead?

>   enableAdminAPI: false

Reviewer: Not sure if these parts make sense in this guide 🤔

Author: Agreed

Reviewer 2: I suggest that the first step of the guide shows the Prometheus resource with all selectors set. IMHO it is easier to get than going back and forth.

  serviceMonitorSelector:
    matchLabels:
      team: frontend
```

## Using PodMonitors

> We can utilize a `PodMonitor` object to scrape metrics from the pods. The `spec.selector` label specifies which Pods Prometheus should scrape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While `ServiceMonitor` requires a `Service` object, `PodMonitor` can bypass the service and find targets based on Pod labels. The `spec.selector` field in the `PodMonitor` resource specifies which Pods Prometheus should scrape.
```

    matchLabels:
      team: frontend
```

## What's Next

> - Learn about the [resoucres]({{<ref "design.md">}}) managed by Prometheus-Operator
> - API Reference for [ServiceMonitor](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/api-reference/api/#monitoring.coreos.com/v1.ServiceMonitor) and [PodMonitor](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/api-reference/api/#monitoring.coreos.com/v1.PodMonitor) CRD
> - Instructions on [deploying Prometheus and Alertmanager instances](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/platform/getting-started/)
> - Set up Alerting Rules
> - Learn about the [Prometheus Agent]({{<ref "prometheus-agent.md">}}) CRD

Reviewer: Should we use the same blocks we have here? https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/getting-started/introduction/
```suggestion
- API Reference for [ServiceMonitor](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/api-reference/api/#monitoring.coreos.com/v1.ServiceMonitor) and [PodMonitor](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/api-reference/api/#monitoring.coreos.com/v1.PodMonitor) CRD
```

I wouldn't put a ton of things here, I think people get lost when there are too many options.

And what do you think about using the same blocks used at the bottom of this page: https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/getting-started/introduction/

Author: > Should we use the same blocks we have here? https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/getting-started/introduction/

That's a great idea. :saluting_face: . We can name the "What's Next' section to 'Next Steps' to maintain similarity.

Author: > I wouldn't put a ton of things here, I think people get lost when there are too many options.

I think we need to discuss this more. If we only add one link then it would just be better to change the order of docs and follow the normal navigation we currently have. However, the aim of the 'What's Next' section is to give options to what the user wants to do. So, it would make sense to add the topics that are connected to the topics discussed on the current page.

We can remove Alerting Rules as it would be the next page(after it is added) in the navigation. Other than that, all things should be mentioned from my perspective.

  resources:
    requests:
      memory: 400Mi

>   enableAdminAPI: false

Reviewer: Same thing here, not sure if resources and AdminAPI are relevant for this page's example

  enableAdminAPI: false
```

> Next:

Reviewer 2: Already commented above but I like the "What's next?" at the end of the doc.
